<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Digenis reader: retroversion principles</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="http://www.obdurodon.org/css/style.css" />
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="reading-view.css" />
        <style type="text/css">
            #abbr {
              columns: 3;
            }</style>
    </head>
    <body>
        <h1>Digenis reader: principles for retroversion</h1>
        <p>Orthography, phonology, and morphology are normalized in conformity with common (not
            universal) practice ca. 1200–50 (roughly from the marriage of Roman Mstyslavyč <q>The
                Great</q> to Anna-Euphrosyne (daughter of Byzantine Emperor Isaac II Angelos) ca.
            1197 through the end of the reign of their son Danylo in 1264).</p>
        <p>See Horace G. Lunt, <q>The language of Rus′ in the eleventh century: some observations
                about facts and theories</q>, <cite>Harvard Ukrainian studies</cite>, 12/13 (1988),
            pp. 276–313 (Appendix at pp. 302–04).</p>
        <section>
            <h2>Phonology and orthography</h2>
            <ol>
                <li>All jers (strong and weak) are written according to etymology, and etymological
                    jers missing from the manuscript are restored. Exception: jers in tense position
                    are always spelled <span class="os">и</span> and <span class="os">ы</span> (not
                        <span class="os">ь</span> or <span class="os">ъ</span>), e.g., <span
                        class="os">новыи</span>, <span class="os">велии</span>, <span class="os"
                        >чьстию</span>.</li>
                <li>Do not write a jer after prefixes <span class="os">без-</span>, <span class="os"
                        >из-</span>, <span class="os">раз-</span>, <span class="os">въз-</span>,
                        <span class="os">об-</span>, and spell voicing assimilations where they
                    occur (cf. Lunt <cite>OCS grammar</cite> §3.311 ff.). Similarly, spell the
                    prepositions <span class="os">без</span> and <span class="os">из</span> without
                    a jer, and spell voicing assimilations where they occur. Exceptions: <ul>
                        <li>Write the prefix <span class="os">объ</span> before <span class="os"
                                >и</span> where the manuscript has <span class="os">обо</span>,
                            e.g., <span class="os">объити</span> for manuscript <span class="os"
                                >обойти</span>, cf. Lunt <cite>OCS grammar</cite> §3.312.</li>
                        <li>Write the prefix <span class="os">изъ</span> before <span class="os"
                                >и</span>, e.g., <span class="os">изъидошѧ</span> for manuscript
                                <span class="os">изыдоша</span>).</li>
                    </ul></li>
                <li><span class="os">ѣ</span> and <span class="os">е</span> are written according to
                    etymology, except that third jat′ is not used (see below, under
                    Morphology).</li>
                <li>Consonant cluster adjustments in the manuscript resulting from the loss of jers
                    in weak position are written according to etymology. E.g., reconstruct <span
                        class="os"><span class="outline">съб</span>ысть сѧ</span> for <span
                        class="os"><span class="outline">зб</span>ы[с]т[ь]ся</span> in the
                    manuscript (voicing assimilation after jer loss) and reconstruct <span
                        class="os">мъногоцѣ<span class="outline">ньн</span>ыѧ</span> for <span
                        class="os">многоце<span class="outline">н</span>ыя</span> in the manuscript
                    (degemination after jer loss).</li>
                <li>The second velar palatalization is written where expected, regardless of whether
                    it is reflected at those locations in the manuscript. The second palatalization
                    of <span class="os">г</span> is spelled <span class="os">з</span> (not <span
                        class="os">ѕ</span>; see Borkovskij and Kuznecov 1963, §21, p. 53).</li>
                <li>Do not write <span class="os">й</span>; write <span class="os">и</span>
                    instead.</li>
                <li>Undo all apocope, e.g., infinitive and short reflexive pronoun. Restore where
                    scribe has simplified <i>/yi, ii/</i>, so <span class="os">выиди</span> even
                    where manuscript writes <span class="os">выди</span> and <span class="os"
                        >добрыи</span> even where the manuscript writes mN/Asg long-form <span
                        class="os">добры</span>.</li>
                <li>Write <span class="os">щ</span> from <i>*tj</i> (also <i>*kti</i>) and <span
                        class="os">ж</span> from <i>*dj</i>. (Lunt A3)<ul>
                        <li>Lexical exception: <span class="os">охочии</span></li>
                    </ul></li>
                <li>Write Galician/Volynian <span class="os">жч</span> for <i>*zdj/zgj</i> (Lunt
                    A3c)</li>
                <li>Plain and soft(ening) vowel letters:<ul>
                        <li>Write <span class="os">ꙗ</span> (or <span class="os">а</span> where
                            required as a replacement; see below) and front nasals etymologically,
                            including instead of third jat′ (see below, under Morphology). Do not
                            use modern letterform <span class="os">я</span></li>
                        <li>
                            <p>Except in situations involving hiatus (e.g., <span class="os"
                                    >наꙋчити</span>), write only <span class="os">ꙗ</span>, <span
                                    class="os">ѩ</span>, <span class="os">ѥ</span>, <span class="os"
                                    >и</span>, <span class="os">ю</span> (not <span class="os"
                                    >а</span>, <span class="os">ѧ</span>, <span class="os">е</span>,
                                    <span class="os">ы</span>, <span class="os">ꙋ</span>) in the
                                following positions:</p>
                            <ul>
                                <li>After vowel letters</li>
                                <li>After palatal <i>/n l r/</i></li>
                            </ul>
                        </li>
                        <li>Write only <span class="os">а</span>, <span class="os">ѧ</span>, <span
                                class="os">е</span>, <span class="os">и</span>, <span class="os"
                                >ꙋ</span> (not <span class="os">ꙗ</span>, <span class="os">ѩ</span>,
                                <span class="os">ѥ</span>, <span class="os">ы</span>, <span
                                class="os">ю</span>) after <span class="os">ш</span>, <span
                                class="os">ж</span>, <span class="os">ч</span>, <span class="os"
                                >щ</span>, <span class="os">ц</span></li>
                        <li>Write <span class="os">ѥ</span>, and not <span class="os">о</span>,
                            initially in words like <span class="os">ѥзеро</span>, <span class="os"
                                >ѥдинъ</span> (Lunt A5)</li>
                        <li>Write <span class="os">оу</span> initially (not <span class="os"
                                >ю</span>; Lunt A4) and <span class="os">ꙋ</span> internally; never
                                <span class="os">у</span></li>
                        <li>Write <span class="os">ꙗ</span> initially (not <span class="os"
                            >а</span>); spell the 1sg personal pronoun <span class="os"
                            >ꙗзъ</span></li>
                        <li>Write <span class="os">ы</span>, and not <span class="os">и</span> after
                                <span class="os">к</span>, <span class="os">г</span>, and <span
                                class="os">х</span></li>
                    </ul></li>
                <li>Use ESl spellings for <i>*tьrt</i>, etc. (Lunt A6)</li>
                <li>Use metathesized (SSl) forms for <i>*tort</i> (never pleophony), except write
                        <q>artificial</q>
                    <b>tret</b> for <i>*tert</i> (e.g., <span class="os">предъ</span>). (Lunt A7–8).<ul>
                        <li>Lexical exceptions: <span class="os">паволока</span>, <span class="os"
                                >оборона</span></li>
                    </ul></li>
                <li>Use SSl spellings for initial <i>*ort-</i> (<b>rat-</b>) (Lunt A8a)</li>
                <li>Use ESl spellings for initial <i>*olt-</i> (<b>lot-</b>) (Lunt A8b)</li>
                <li>Remove akan′e, replacing it with etymological forms.</li>
                <li>Replace Arabic numerals with Cyrillic in the retroversion (but not the
                    manuscript)</li>
            </ol>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h2>Morphology</h2>
            <ol>
                <li>Write original, rather than analogical, endings. For example, where o-stem and
                    ā-stem nominal endings differ from jo-stem and jā-stem endings, respectively, in
                    more than just hard vs soft spellings, use the original forms. Thus Dsg <span
                        class="os">дѣвици</span>, despite modern Russian <b>девице</b>.</li>
                <li>Write o-stem and jo-stem mnIsg as ESl <span class="os">-ъмь</span>, <span
                        class="os">-ьмь</span>, respectively. (Lunt B10)</li>
                <li>Write ESl <span class="os">-ть</span> (front jer) in third-person present-tense
                    verb forms. (Lunt B11)</li>
                <li>Write the optional <span class="os">-ть</span> (front jer) ending in parentheses
                    on third-person sg and pl (not du) imperfects regardless of whether it is
                    present in the manuscript or not. (Lunt B11, B15)</li>
                <li>Write the optional <span class="os">-тъ</span> (back jer) in parentheses after
                    2sg and 3sg aorists for Class I verbs with nasal (e.g., <span class="os"
                        >начѧти</span>), <i>/j/</i> (e.g., <span class="os">бити</span>), and
                        <i>/r/</i> (e.g., <span class="os">умрети</span>), and the verb <span
                        class="os">жити</span> regardless of whether it is present in the manuscript
                    or not (cf. Lunt <cite>OCS grammar</cite>, §10.52).</li>
                <li>Write non-past <span class="os">ѥсть</span> and aorist <span class="os"
                        >бысть</span> (front jer).</li>
                <li>As a (somewhat arbitrary) normalization, write non-past <span class="os"
                        >дасть</span>, <span class="os">ѣсть</span> (front jer), but aorist <span
                        class="os">дастъ</span> and <span class="os">ѣстъ</span> (back jer) (cf.
                    Schmalstieg p. 95).</li>
                <li>DLsg personal pronouns have SSl forms: <span class="os">мьнѣ</span>, <span
                        class="os">тебѣ</span>, <span class="os">себѣ</span>. (Lunt B12)</li>
                <li>Write SSl <span class="os">-ѧ</span> instead of ESl third jat′ in soft endings
                    of nouns and pronouns (fGsg, fNApl, mApl). (Lunt B13)</li>
                <li>Write SSl <span class="os">-ы</span>, not ESl <span class="os">-а</span>, for
                    mNsg present active participle of Class I verbs. (Lunt B14)</li>
                <li>Spell the imperfective suffix as <span class="os">ꙗ</span> (or <span class="os"
                        >а</span>, where required as above), that is, contracted <span class="os"
                        >несꙗше</span>.</li>
                <li>Spell the imperfect of Class IVA verbs (e.g., <span class="os">носити</span>)
                    with the SSl mutation (<span class="os">ношаше</span>(<span class="os"
                    >ть</span>)), instead of the ESl absence of mutation. (Lunt B15)</li>
                <li>Spell long-form adjectives as follows:<ul>
                        <li>mnGsg always as contracted adjectival ending <span class="os"
                                >-аго</span> (Lunt B16)</li>
                        <li>fGsg always as <span class="os">-ыѩ</span> (cf. Lunt B13)</li>
                        <li>all others either contracted adjectival or pronominal ending as in the
                            manuscript (e.g., contracted adjectival Lsg <span class="os">–ѣмь</span>
                            or pronominal <span class="os">–омь</span>)</li>
                    </ul></li>
                <li>The reflexive enclitic <span class="os">сѧ</span> is always written as <span
                        class="os">сѧ</span> (even when the manuscript reads <span class="os"
                        >с</span>), and is always written separately from the word that precedes
                    it.</li>
                <li>Dual:<ul>
                        <li>Preserve for forms where duals appear in the manuscripts.</li>
                        <li>Restore for where dual is attested elsewhere in the manuscripts.</li>
                        <li>Restore for <q>natural (or cultural) pairs and two like objects</q>
                            (Vlasto) where dual is attested, or where plural is not attested in dual
                            context, in SDRJaXI-XIV.</li>
                    </ul></li>
                <li>We write agreeing participles consistently in our normalization as dictated by
                    meaning, although the manuscripts show the emergence of non-agreeing gerunds in
                    an advanced stage.</li>
            </ol>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h2>Lexicon</h2>
            <ol>
                <li>Write <span class="os">цьсарь</span> in general (including references to the
                    Amir), but <span class="os">Цѣсарь</span> for the Byzantine emperor, and never
                    modern <b>царь</b></li>
            </ol>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h2>Syntax</h2>
            <ol>
                <li>With respect to the copula in nominal sentences, we follow the manuscripts for
                    all persons if the subject is expressed (Vlasto 4.1(a,c) [p. 188–89]). If the
                    subject is not expressed, we include the copula in the first and second
                    person.</li>
                <li>For the pf we always include the auxiliary in the 1st and 2nd person; for the
                    3rd person we follow the manuscripts (Vlasto 3.105 [pp. 159–60], Vlasto 4.1(b)
                    [pp. 188–89]).</li>
                <li>If a 1st or 2nd person copula or auxiliary is restored, we remove a pronoun
                    except where emphatic (e.g., we change <span class="os">аще бы ꙗ</span> to <span
                        class="os">аще быхъ</span> in Reading 5).</li>
                <li>We retain collective (singular) noun with plural verb where it occurs in the
                    manuscript (e.g., retroversion, following the manuscript: <span class="os">и
                        братиꙗ моꙗ сильни сꙋть</span> in Reading 5).</li>
            </ol>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h2>Abbreviation principles</h2>
            <ol id="abbr">
                <li>Spell gender, case, and number as <b>mNsg</b>, etc.</li>
                <li><b>aor</b> (aorist)</li>
                <li><b>pf</b> (perfect)</li>
                <li><b>pf neg</b> (negative perfect, e.g., <b>něstь sъbylъ sę</b>)</li>
                <li><b>ipf</b> (imperfect)</li>
                <li><b>imv</b> (imperative)</li>
                <li><b>pr</b>, <b>pt</b>, <b>fut</b> (present, past, future, but write out
                    "imperfective aor" where needed)</li>
                <li><b>inf</b> (infinitive)</li>
                <li><b>cond</b> (conditional)</li>
                <li><b>act</b> and <b>pass</b> (active, passive)</li>
                <li><b>ppl</b> (participle)</li>
                <li><b>sh</b> and <b>lg</b> (short-form and long-form adj or ppl)</li>
                <li><b>adj</b>, <b>adv</b>, <b>noun</b>, <b>verb</b>, <b>conj</b> (conjunction),
                        <b>int</b> (interjection), <b>prep</b>, <b>pron</b></li>
                <li><b>pron rel</b> (relative pronoun)</li>
                <li><b>pron pers</b> (personal pronoun)</li>
                <li><b>pron interrog</b> (interrogative pronoun)</li>
                <li><b>dat+inf</b> (dative plus infinitive)</li>
                <li><b>dat abs</b> (dative absolute)</li>
                <li><b>adj poss</b> (possessive adjective)</li>
                <li><b>comp</b> and <b>sup</b> (comparative, superlative)</li>
                <li><b>Gk</b> (Greek)</li>
            </ol>
            <p>We include no information about aspect in annotations except <q>imperfective aor</q>
                where appropriate for <b>byti</b>, or where the aspect might be unexpected (e.g.,
                retroversion, following the manuscript, Reading 5: <span class="os">И слышавъши того
                    гласа</span>.</p>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h2>Other annotation conventions</h2>
            <p>Adjectives are cited in long form except where those do not exist.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</html>
